en/app-unicode.rst, before:

.. -*- mode: rst -*-
.. include:: ../definitions.rst

.. standard global imports

    >>> import nltk, re, pprint

.. _app-unicode:

======================================
Appendix: Text Processing with Unicode 
======================================

Our programs will often need to deal with different languages, and
different character sets.  The concept of "plain text" is a fiction.
If you live in the English-speaking world you probably use ASCII,
possibly without realizing it.  If you live in Europe you might use
one of the extended Latin character sets, containing such characters
as "|oslash|" for Danish and Norwegian, "|odacute|" for Hungarian,
"|ntilde|" for Spanish and Breton, and "|ncaron|" for Czech and
Slovak. In this section, we will give an overview of how to use
Unicode for processing texts that use non-ASCII character sets.

----------------
What is Unicode?
----------------

Unicode supports over a million characters.  Each of these
characters is assigned a number, called a **code point**.  In Python, code
points are written in the form ``\u``\ *XXXX*, where *XXXX* is the number
in 4-digit hexadecimal form.

Within a program, Unicode code points can be manipulated directly, but
when Unicode characters are stored in files or displayed on a terminal
they must be encoded as one or more bytes.  Some encodings (such
as ASCII and Latin-2) use a single byte, so they can only support a
small subset of Unicode, suited to a single language.  Other encodings
(such as UTF-8) use multiple bytes and can represent the full range of
Unicode.

Text in files will be in a particular encoding, so we need some
mechanism for translating it into Unicode |mdash| translation into
Unicode is called **decoding**. Conversely, to write out Unicode to a
file or a terminal, we first need to translate it into a suitable
encoding |mdash| this translation out of Unicode is called **encoding**. The
following diagram illustrates.

.. image:: ../images/unicode.png
   :scale: 10

From a Unicode perspective, characters are abstract entities which can
be realized as one or more **glyphs**. Only glyphs can appear on a
screen or be printed on paper. A font is a mapping from characters to glyphs.

----------------------------------
Extracting encoded text from files
----------------------------------

Let's assume that we have a small text file, and that we know how it
is encoded. For example, ``polish-lat2.txt``, as the name suggests, is
a snippet of Polish text (from the Polish Wikipedia; see
http://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biblioteka_Pruska), encoded as Latin-2,
also known as ISO-8859-2. The function ``nltk.data.find()`` locates the
file for us.

    >>> import nltk.data
    >>> path = nltk.data.find('samples/polish-lat2.txt')

The Python ``codecs`` module provides functions to read encoded data
into Unicode strings, and to write out Unicode strings in encoded
form.  The ``codecs.open()`` function takes an encoding parameter to
specify the encoding of the file being read or written. So let's import
the ``codecs`` module, and call it with the encoding ``'latin2'`` to open
our Polish file as Unicode.

    >>> import codecs
    >>> f = codecs.open(path, encoding='latin2')

For a list of encoding parameters allowed by ``codecs``, see
http://docs.python.org/lib/standard-encodings.html.

Text read from the file object ``f`` will be returned in Unicode. As
we pointed out earlier, in order to view this text on a terminal, we
need to encode it, using a suitable encoding.  The Python-specific
encoding ``unicode_escape`` is a dummy encoding that converts all
non-ASCII characters into their ``\u``\ *XXXX* representations.  Code
points above the ASCII 0-127 range but below 256 are represented in
the two-digit form ``\x``\ *XX*.

    >>> lines = f.readlines()
    >>> for l in lines:
    ...     l = l[:-1]
    ...     uni = l.encode('unicode_escape')
    ...     print uni
    Pruska Biblioteka Pa\u0144stwowa. Jej dawne zbiory znane pod nazw\u0105
    "Berlinka" to skarb kultury i sztuki niemieckiej. Przewiezione przez
    Niemc\xf3w pod koniec II wojny \u015bwiatowej na Dolny \u015al\u0105sk, zosta\u0142y
    odnalezione po 1945 r. na terytorium Polski. Trafi\u0142y do Biblioteki
    Jagiello\u0144skiej w Krakowie, obejmuj\u0105 ponad 500 tys. zabytkowych
    archiwali\xf3w, m.in. manuskrypty Goethego, Mozarta, Beethovena, Bacha.

The first line above illustrates a Unicode escape string, namely
preceded by the ``\u`` escape string, namely ``\u0144`` . The relevant
Unicode character will be dislayed on the screen as the glyph
|nacute|.  In the third line of the preceding example, we see
``\xf3``, which corresponds to the glyph |oacute|, and is within the
128-255 range.

In Python, a Unicode string literal can be specified by
preceding an ordinary string literal with a ``u``, as in
``u'hello'``. Arbitrary Unicode characters are defined using the
``\u``\ *XXXX* escape sequence inside a Unicode string literal.
We find the integer ordinal of a character using ``ord()``. For example:

    >>> ord('a')
    97

The hexadecimal 4 digit notation for 97 is 0061, so we can define a
Unicode string literal with the appropriate escape sequence:

    >>> a = u'\u0061'
    >>> a
    u'a'
    >>> print a
    a

Notice that the Python ``print`` statement is assuming a default encoding of the
Unicode character, namely ASCII. However, |nacute| is outside the
ASCII range, so cannot be printed unless we specify an encoding. In
the following example, we have specified that ``print`` should use the
``repr()`` of the string, which outputs the UTF-8 escape sequences
(of the form ``\x``\ *XX*) rather than trying to render the glyphs.
        
    >>> nacute = u'\u0144'
    >>> nacute
    u'\u0144'
    >>> nacute_utf = nacute.encode('utf8')
    >>> print repr(nacute_utf)
    '\xc5\x84'

If your operating system and locale are set up to render UTF-8 encoded
characters, you ought to be able to give the Python command

    ``print nacute_utf``

and see |nacute| on your screen.

.. Note:: There are many factors determining what glyphs are rendered
   on your screen. If you are sure that you have the correct encoding,
   but your Python code is still failing to produce the glyphs you
   expected, you should also check that you have the necessary fonts
   installed on your system.

The module ``unicodedata`` lets us inspect the properties of Unicode
characters. In the following example, we select all characters in the
third line of our Polish text outside the ASCII range and print their
UTF-8 escaped value, followed by their code point integer using the
standard Unicode convention (i.e., prefixing the hex digits with
``U+``), followed by their Unicode name.

    >>> import unicodedata
    >>> line = lines[2]
    >>> print line.encode('unicode_escape')
    Niemc\xf3w pod koniec II wojny \u015bwiatowej na Dolny \u015al\u0105sk, zosta\u0142y\n
    >>> for c in line:
    ...     if ord(c) > 127:
    ...         print '%r U+%04x %s' % (c.encode('utf8'), ord(c), unicodedata.name(c))
    '\xc3\xb3' U+00f3 LATIN SMALL LETTER O WITH ACUTE
    '\xc5\x9b' U+015b LATIN SMALL LETTER S WITH ACUTE
    '\xc5\x9a' U+015a LATIN CAPITAL LETTER S WITH ACUTE
    '\xc4\x85' U+0105 LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH OGONEK
    '\xc5\x82' U+0142 LATIN SMALL LETTER L WITH STROKE

If you replace the ``%r`` (which yields the ``repr()`` value) by
``%s`` in the format string of the code sample above, and if your system supports UTF-8,
you should see an output like the following:
 
| |oacute| U+00f3 LATIN SMALL LETTER O WITH ACUTE
| |sacute| U+015b LATIN SMALL LETTER S WITH ACUTE
| |Sacute| U+015a LATIN CAPITAL LETTER S WITH ACUTE
| |aogonek| U+0105 LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH OGONEK
| |lstroke| U+0142 LATIN SMALL LETTER L WITH STROKE

Alternatively, you may need to replace the encoding ``'utf8'`` in the
example by ``'latin2'``, again depending on the details of your system.

The next examples illustrate how Python string methods and the ``re``
module accept Unicode strings.

    >>> line.find(u'zosta\u0142y')
    54
    >>> line = line.lower()
    >>> print line.encode('unicode_escape')
    niemc\xf3w pod koniec ii wojny \u015bwiatowej na dolny \u015bl\u0105sk, zosta\u0142y\n
    >>> import re
    >>> m = re.search(u'\u015b\w*', line)
    >>> m.group()
    u'\u015bwiatowej'

The |NLTK| ``tokenizer`` module allows Unicode strings as input, and
correspondingly yields Unicode strings as output.

    >>> from nltk.tokenize import WordTokenizer
    >>> tokenizer = WordTokenizer()
    >>> tokenizer.tokenize(line)  # doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
    [u'niemc\xf3w', u'pod', u'koniec', u'ii', u'wojny', u'\u015bwiatowej',
    u'na', u'dolny', u'\u015bl\u0105sk', u'zosta\u0142y']

-----------------------------------
Using your local encoding in Python
-----------------------------------
    
If you are used to working with characters in a particular local
encoding, you probably want to be able to use your standard methods
for inputting and editing strings in a Python file. In order to do this,
you need to include the string ``'# -*- coding: <coding> -*-'`` as the
first or second line of your file. Note that *<coding>* has to be a
string like ``'latin-1'``, ``'big5'`` or ``'utf-8'``.

.. Note:: If you are using Emacs as your editor, the coding specification
   will also be interpreted as a specification of the editor's coding
   for the file. Not all of the valid Python names for codings are
   accepted by Emacs.

The following screenshot illustrates the use of UTF-8 encoded string
literals within the IDLE editor:

.. image:: ../images/polish-utf8.png

.. Note:: The above example requires that an appropriate font is set in
   IDLE's preferences. In this case, we chose Courier CE.

.. cf http://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-list/2004-February/247783.html

    It is also possible to enter non-ASCII characters in interactive
    mode. IDLE will convert them to the locale's encoding before
    evaluating the source code; if that fails, you get the message you
    see. So where you trying to enter hangul characters in interactive
    mode in a locale that does not support hangul, or are you lacking
    a codec for your locale?

    In interactive mode, UTF-8 is never used (unless you have an
    UTF-8 locale).

The above example also illustrates how regular expressions can use
encoded strings.


Further Reading
---------------

There are a number of online discussions of Unicode in general, and of
Python facilities for handling Unicode. The following are worth
consulting:

* Jason Orendorff, *Unicode for Programmers*,
  http://www.jorendorff.com/articles/unicode/.

* A. M. Kuchling, *Unicode HOWTO*,
  http://www.amk.ca/python/howto/unicode

* Frederik Lundh, *Python Unicode Objects*, http://effbot.org/zone/unicode-objects.htm

* Joel Spolsky, *The Absolute Minimum Every Software Developer
  Absolutely, Positively Must Know About Unicode and Character Sets
  (No Excuses!)*, http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/Unicode.html

.. include:: footer.rst

Commit message:

doc/en/app-sets.rst * new appendix; added to Makefile and book.rst * reinstated material from ch06-extras.rst   (previously in the old ch10)
doc/en/app-unicode.rst
* added comment taken from interesting post by
  Neil Mayhew

doc/en/ch06.rst
* reinstated material on search from ch06-extras.rst

doc/en/ch12.rst
* more writing, incl start of new section on XML



svn/trunk@7170

en/app-unicode.rst, after:

.. -*- mode: rst -*-
.. include:: ../definitions.rst

.. standard global imports

    >>> import nltk, re, pprint

.. _app-unicode:

======================================
Appendix: Text Processing with Unicode 
======================================

Our programs will often need to deal with different languages, and
different character sets.  The concept of "plain text" is a fiction.
If you live in the English-speaking world you probably use ASCII,
possibly without realizing it.  If you live in Europe you might use
one of the extended Latin character sets, containing such characters
as "|oslash|" for Danish and Norwegian, "|odacute|" for Hungarian,
"|ntilde|" for Spanish and Breton, and "|ncaron|" for Czech and
Slovak. In this section, we will give an overview of how to use
Unicode for processing texts that use non-ASCII character sets.

----------------
What is Unicode?
----------------

Unicode supports over a million characters.  Each of these
characters is assigned a number, called a **code point**.  In Python, code
points are written in the form ``\u``\ *XXXX*, where *XXXX* is the number
in 4-digit hexadecimal form.

Within a program, Unicode code points can be manipulated directly, but
when Unicode characters are stored in files or displayed on a terminal
they must be encoded as one or more bytes.  Some encodings (such
as ASCII and Latin-2) use a single byte, so they can only support a
small subset of Unicode, suited to a single language.  Other encodings
(such as UTF-8) use multiple bytes and can represent the full range of
Unicode.

Text in files will be in a particular encoding, so we need some
mechanism for translating it into Unicode |mdash| translation into
Unicode is called **decoding**. Conversely, to write out Unicode to a
file or a terminal, we first need to translate it into a suitable
encoding |mdash| this translation out of Unicode is called **encoding**. The
following diagram illustrates.

.. image:: ../images/unicode.png
   :scale: 10

From a Unicode perspective, characters are abstract entities which can
be realized as one or more **glyphs**. Only glyphs can appear on a
screen or be printed on paper. A font is a mapping from characters to glyphs.

----------------------------------
Extracting encoded text from files
----------------------------------

Let's assume that we have a small text file, and that we know how it
is encoded. For example, ``polish-lat2.txt``, as the name suggests, is
a snippet of Polish text (from the Polish Wikipedia; see
http://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biblioteka_Pruska), encoded as Latin-2,
also known as ISO-8859-2. The function ``nltk.data.find()`` locates the
file for us.

    >>> import nltk.data
    >>> path = nltk.data.find('samples/polish-lat2.txt')

The Python ``codecs`` module provides functions to read encoded data
into Unicode strings, and to write out Unicode strings in encoded
form.  The ``codecs.open()`` function takes an encoding parameter to
specify the encoding of the file being read or written. So let's import
the ``codecs`` module, and call it with the encoding ``'latin2'`` to open
our Polish file as Unicode.

    >>> import codecs
    >>> f = codecs.open(path, encoding='latin2')

For a list of encoding parameters allowed by ``codecs``, see
http://docs.python.org/lib/standard-encodings.html.

Text read from the file object ``f`` will be returned in Unicode. As
we pointed out earlier, in order to view this text on a terminal, we
need to encode it, using a suitable encoding.  The Python-specific
encoding ``unicode_escape`` is a dummy encoding that converts all
non-ASCII characters into their ``\u``\ *XXXX* representations.  Code
points above the ASCII 0-127 range but below 256 are represented in
the two-digit form ``\x``\ *XX*.

    >>> lines = f.readlines()
    >>> for l in lines:
    ...     l = l[:-1]
    ...     uni = l.encode('unicode_escape')
    ...     print uni
    Pruska Biblioteka Pa\u0144stwowa. Jej dawne zbiory znane pod nazw\u0105
    "Berlinka" to skarb kultury i sztuki niemieckiej. Przewiezione przez
    Niemc\xf3w pod koniec II wojny \u015bwiatowej na Dolny \u015al\u0105sk, zosta\u0142y
    odnalezione po 1945 r. na terytorium Polski. Trafi\u0142y do Biblioteki
    Jagiello\u0144skiej w Krakowie, obejmuj\u0105 ponad 500 tys. zabytkowych
    archiwali\xf3w, m.in. manuskrypty Goethego, Mozarta, Beethovena, Bacha.

The first line above illustrates a Unicode escape string, namely
preceded by the ``\u`` escape string, namely ``\u0144`` . The relevant
Unicode character will be dislayed on the screen as the glyph
|nacute|.  In the third line of the preceding example, we see
``\xf3``, which corresponds to the glyph |oacute|, and is within the
128-255 range.

In Python, a Unicode string literal can be specified by
preceding an ordinary string literal with a ``u``, as in
``u'hello'``. Arbitrary Unicode characters are defined using the
``\u``\ *XXXX* escape sequence inside a Unicode string literal.
We find the integer ordinal of a character using ``ord()``. For example:

    >>> ord('a')
    97

The hexadecimal 4 digit notation for 97 is 0061, so we can define a
Unicode string literal with the appropriate escape sequence:

    >>> a = u'\u0061'
    >>> a
    u'a'
    >>> print a
    a

Notice that the Python ``print`` statement is assuming a default encoding of the
Unicode character, namely ASCII. However, |nacute| is outside the
ASCII range, so cannot be printed unless we specify an encoding. In
the following example, we have specified that ``print`` should use the
``repr()`` of the string, which outputs the UTF-8 escape sequences
(of the form ``\x``\ *XX*) rather than trying to render the glyphs.
        
    >>> nacute = u'\u0144'
    >>> nacute
    u'\u0144'
    >>> nacute_utf = nacute.encode('utf8')
    >>> print repr(nacute_utf)
    '\xc5\x84'

If your operating system and locale are set up to render UTF-8 encoded
characters, you ought to be able to give the Python command

    ``print nacute_utf``

and see |nacute| on your screen.

.. Note:: There are many factors determining what glyphs are rendered
   on your screen. If you are sure that you have the correct encoding,
   but your Python code is still failing to produce the glyphs you
   expected, you should also check that you have the necessary fonts
   installed on your system.

The module ``unicodedata`` lets us inspect the properties of Unicode
characters. In the following example, we select all characters in the
third line of our Polish text outside the ASCII range and print their
UTF-8 escaped value, followed by their code point integer using the
standard Unicode convention (i.e., prefixing the hex digits with
``U+``), followed by their Unicode name.

    >>> import unicodedata
    >>> line = lines[2]
    >>> print line.encode('unicode_escape')
    Niemc\xf3w pod koniec II wojny \u015bwiatowej na Dolny \u015al\u0105sk, zosta\u0142y\n
    >>> for c in line:
    ...     if ord(c) > 127:
    ...         print '%r U+%04x %s' % (c.encode('utf8'), ord(c), unicodedata.name(c))
    '\xc3\xb3' U+00f3 LATIN SMALL LETTER O WITH ACUTE
    '\xc5\x9b' U+015b LATIN SMALL LETTER S WITH ACUTE
    '\xc5\x9a' U+015a LATIN CAPITAL LETTER S WITH ACUTE
    '\xc4\x85' U+0105 LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH OGONEK
    '\xc5\x82' U+0142 LATIN SMALL LETTER L WITH STROKE

If you replace the ``%r`` (which yields the ``repr()`` value) by
``%s`` in the format string of the code sample above, and if your system supports UTF-8,
you should see an output like the following:
 
| |oacute| U+00f3 LATIN SMALL LETTER O WITH ACUTE
| |sacute| U+015b LATIN SMALL LETTER S WITH ACUTE
| |Sacute| U+015a LATIN CAPITAL LETTER S WITH ACUTE
| |aogonek| U+0105 LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH OGONEK
| |lstroke| U+0142 LATIN SMALL LETTER L WITH STROKE

Alternatively, you may need to replace the encoding ``'utf8'`` in the
example by ``'latin2'``, again depending on the details of your system.

The next examples illustrate how Python string methods and the ``re``
module accept Unicode strings.

    >>> line.find(u'zosta\u0142y')
    54
    >>> line = line.lower()
    >>> print line.encode('unicode_escape')
    niemc\xf3w pod koniec ii wojny \u015bwiatowej na dolny \u015bl\u0105sk, zosta\u0142y\n
    >>> import re
    >>> m = re.search(u'\u015b\w*', line)
    >>> m.group()
    u'\u015bwiatowej'

The |NLTK| ``tokenizer`` module allows Unicode strings as input, and
correspondingly yields Unicode strings as output.

    >>> from nltk.tokenize import WordTokenizer
    >>> tokenizer = WordTokenizer()
    >>> tokenizer.tokenize(line)  # doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE
    [u'niemc\xf3w', u'pod', u'koniec', u'ii', u'wojny', u'\u015bwiatowej',
    u'na', u'dolny', u'\u015bl\u0105sk', u'zosta\u0142y']

-----------------------------------
Using your local encoding in Python
-----------------------------------
    
If you are used to working with characters in a particular local
encoding, you probably want to be able to use your standard methods
for inputting and editing strings in a Python file. In order to do this,
you need to include the string ``'# -*- coding: <coding> -*-'`` as the
first or second line of your file. Note that *<coding>* has to be a
string like ``'latin-1'``, ``'big5'`` or ``'utf-8'``.

.. Note:: If you are using Emacs as your editor, the coding specification
   will also be interpreted as a specification of the editor's coding
   for the file. Not all of the valid Python names for codings are
   accepted by Emacs.

The following screenshot illustrates the use of UTF-8 encoded string
literals within the IDLE editor:

.. image:: ../images/polish-utf8.png

.. Note:: The above example requires that an appropriate font is set in
   IDLE's preferences. In this case, we chose Courier CE.

.. cf http://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-list/2004-February/247783.html

    It is also possible to enter non-ASCII characters in interactive
    mode. IDLE will convert them to the locale's encoding before
    evaluating the source code; if that fails, you get the message you
    see. So where you trying to enter hangul characters in interactive
    mode in a locale that does not support hangul, or are you lacking
    a codec for your locale?

    In interactive mode, UTF-8 is never used (unless you have an
    UTF-8 locale).

The above example also illustrates how regular expressions can use
encoded strings.


.. Neil Mayhew: There is another way to force utf-8 output without explicitly encoding
   every string, and that's to 'wrap' the output stream with a codec. This
   technique is particularly useful if you are writing to a file and you
   know that the file *must* have a particular encoding regardless of the
   locale (eg because it's XML).
   f = codecs.open("test.out", "w", "utf-8")
   Then f can be used just like any other file, including print >> f,
   f.write, etc.
   If you really do need to use stdout, you can even wrap that as follows:
   sys.stdout = codecs.getwriter('utf-8')(sys.stdout)
   These things also work for input (with the obvious modifications).
   And, to finish, here's one more nifty trick:
   sys.argv = map(lambda a: a.decode('utf-8'), sys.argv)


Further Reading
---------------

There are a number of online discussions of Unicode in general, and of
Python facilities for handling Unicode. The following are worth
consulting:

* Jason Orendorff, *Unicode for Programmers*,
  http://www.jorendorff.com/articles/unicode/.

* A. M. Kuchling, *Unicode HOWTO*,
  http://www.amk.ca/python/howto/unicode

* Frederik Lundh, *Python Unicode Objects*, http://effbot.org/zone/unicode-objects.htm

* Joel Spolsky, *The Absolute Minimum Every Software Developer
  Absolutely, Positively Must Know About Unicode and Character Sets
  (No Excuses!)*, http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/Unicode.html

.. include:: footer.rst
