en/app-nlp-python.rst, before:

.. -*- mode: rst -*-
.. include:: ../definitions.rst

.. _app-nlp-python:

======================================================
Appendix: NLP in Python vs other Programming Languages
======================================================

Many programming languages have been used for NLP.  As explained in
the Preface, we have chosen Python because we believe it is
well-suited to the special requirements of NLP.  Here we present a
brief survey of several programming languages, for the simple task of
reading a text and printing the words that end with ``ing``.  We begin
with the Python version, which we believe is readily interpretable,
even by non Python programmers::

  import sys
  for line in sys.stdin:
      for word in line.split():
          if word.endswith('ing'):
              print word


Like Python, Perl is a scripting language.  However, its syntax is
obscure.  For instance, it is difficult to guess what kind of entities
are represented by: ``<>``, ``$``, ``my``, and ``split``, in the following
program::

  while (<>) {
      foreach my $word (split) {
          if ($word =~ /ing$/) {
              print "$word\n";
          }
      }
  }

We agree that "it is quite easy in Perl to write programs that simply
look like raving gibberish, even to experienced Perl programmers"
(Hammond 2003:47).  Having used Perl ourselves in research and
teaching since the 1980s, we have found that Perl programs of any size
are inordinately difficult to maintain and re-use.  Therefore we
believe Perl is no longer a particularly suitable choice of
programming language for linguists or for language processing.

Prolog is a logic programming language which has been popular for
developing natural language parsers and feature-based grammars, given
the inbuilt support for search and the *unification* operation which
combines two feature structures into one.  Unfortunately Prolog is not
easy to use for string processing or input/output, as the following
program code demonstrates for our linguistic example::

  main :-
      current_input(InputStream),
      read_stream_to_codes(InputStream, Codes),
      codesToWords(Codes, Words),
      maplist(string_to_list, Words, Strings),
      filter(endsWithIng, Strings, MatchingStrings),
      writeMany(MatchingStrings),
      halt.
  
  codesToWords([], []).
  codesToWords([Head | Tail], Words) :-
      ( char_type(Head, space) ->
          codesToWords(Tail, Words)
      ;
          getWord([Head | Tail], Word, Rest),
          codesToWords(Rest, Words0),
          Words = [Word | Words0]
      ).
  
  getWord([], [], []).
  getWord([Head | Tail], Word, Rest) :-
      (
          ( char_type(Head, space) ; char_type(Head, punct) )
      ->  Word = [], Tail = Rest
      ;   getWord(Tail, Word0, Rest), Word = [Head | Word0]
      ).
  
  filter(Predicate, List0, List) :-
      ( List0 = [] -> List = []
      ;   List0 = [Head | Tail],
          ( apply(Predicate, [Head]) ->
              filter(Predicate, Tail, List1),
              List = [Head | List1]
          ;   filter(Predicate, Tail, List)
          )
      ).
  
  endsWithIng(String) :- sub_string(String, _Start, _Len, 0, 'ing').
  
  writeMany([]).
  writeMany([Head | Tail]) :- write(Head), nl, writeMany(Tail).

Java is an object-oriented language incorporating native support for
the Internet, that was originally designed to permit the same
executable program to be run on most computer platforms.  Java has
replaced COBOL as the standard language for business enterprise
software::

  import java.io.*;
  public class IngWords {
      public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
          BufferedReader in = new BufferedReader(new
  	    InputStreamReader(
                   System.in));
          String line = in.readLine();
          while (line != null) {
              for (String word : line.split(" ")) {
                  if (word.endsWith("ing"))
                      System.out.println(word);
              }
              line = in.readLine();
          }
      }
  }


The C programming language is a highly-efficient low-level language
that is popular for operating system and networking software::

  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <string.h>

  int main(int argc, char **argv) {
     int i = 0;
     int c = 1;
     char buffer[1024];

     while (c != EOF) {
         c = fgetc(stdin);
         if ( (c >= '0' && c <= '9') || (c >= 'a' && c <= 'z') || (c >= 'A' && c <= 'Z') ) {
             buffer[i++] = (char) c;
             continue;
         } else {
             if (i > 2 && (strncmp(buffer+i-3, "ing", 3) == 0 || strncmp(buffer+i-3, "ING", 3) == 0 ) ) {
                 buffer[i] = 0;
                 puts(buffer);
             }
             i = 0;
         }
     }
     return 0;
  }

LISP is a so-called functional programming language, in which all
objects are lists, and all operations are performed by (nested)
functions of the form ``(function arg1 arg2 ...)``.  Many of the
earliest NLP systems were implemented in LISP::

  (defpackage "REGEXP-TEST" (:use "LISP" "REGEXP"))
  (in-package "REGEXP-TEST")
  
  (defun has-suffix (string suffix)
    "Open a file and look for words ending in _ing."
    (with-open-file (f string)
       (with-loop-split (s f " ")
          (mapcar #'(lambda (x) (has_suffix suffix x)) s))))
  
  (defun has_suffix (suffix string)
    (let* ((suffix_len (length suffix))
     (string_len (length string))
      (base_len (- string_len suffix_len)))
      (if (string-equal suffix string :start1 0 :end1 NIL :start2 base_len :end2 NIL)
          (print string))))
  
  (has-suffix "test.txt" "ing")
  
Ruby is a more recently developed scripting language than Python,
best known for its convenient web application framework, *Ruby on Rails*.
Here are two Ruby programs for finding words ending in `ing`:lx:\ ::

  ARGF.each { |line|
    line.split.find_all { |word|
      word.match(/ing$/)
    }.each { |word|
      puts word
    }
  }


  for line in ARGF
    for word in line.split
      if word.match(/ing$/) then
        puts word
      end
    end
  end

Haskell is another functional programming language which permits
a much more compact (but incomprehensible) solution of our simple task::

  import Data.List
  main = putStr . unlines . filter ("ing" `isSuffixOf`) . words =<< getContent

The unix shell can also be used for simple linguistic processing.  Here is
a simple pipeline for finding the `ing`:lx: words.  The first step transliterates
any whitespace character to a newline, so that each word of the text occurs on
its own line, and the second step finds all lines ending in `ing`:lx:\ ::

  tr [:space:] '\n' | grep ing$

(We are grateful to the following people for furnishing us with these
program samples: Tim Baldwin, Trevor Cohn, David Duke, Rod Farmer,
Andrew Hardie, Aaron Harnly, Edward Ivanovic, and Lars Yencken.)

.. include:: footer.rst

Commit message:

doc/en/ch05.rst * added feedback (marked with "SB") * fixed typos; changed a bulletted list into running prose
doc/en/app-nlp-python.rst
* removed some references to Python as a "scripting" language


svn/trunk@7215

en/app-nlp-python.rst, after:

.. -*- mode: rst -*-
.. include:: ../definitions.rst

.. _app-nlp-python:

======================================================
Appendix: NLP in Python vs other Programming Languages
======================================================

Many programming languages have been used for NLP.  As explained in
the Preface, we have chosen Python because we believe it is
well-suited to the special requirements of NLP.  Here we present a
brief survey of several programming languages, for the simple task of
reading a text and printing the words that end with ``ing``.  We begin
with the Python version, which we believe is readily interpretable,
even by non Python programmers::

  import sys
  for line in sys.stdin:
      for word in line.split():
          if word.endswith('ing'):
              print word


Like Python, Perl is an interpreted language.  However, its syntax is
obscure.  For instance, it is difficult to guess what kind of entities
are represented by: ``<>``, ``$``, ``my``, and ``split``, in the following
program::

  while (<>) {
      foreach my $word (split) {
          if ($word =~ /ing$/) {
              print "$word\n";
          }
      }
  }

We agree that "it is quite easy in Perl to write programs that simply
look like raving gibberish, even to experienced Perl programmers"
(Hammond 2003:47).  Having used Perl ourselves in research and
teaching since the 1980s, we have found that Perl programs of any size
are inordinately difficult to maintain and re-use.  Therefore we
believe Perl is no longer a particularly suitable choice of
programming language for linguists or for language processing.

Prolog is a logic programming language which has been popular for
developing natural language parsers and feature-based grammars, given
the inbuilt support for search and the *unification* operation which
combines two feature structures into one.  Unfortunately Prolog is not
easy to use for string processing or input/output, as the following
program code demonstrates for our linguistic example::

  main :-
      current_input(InputStream),
      read_stream_to_codes(InputStream, Codes),
      codesToWords(Codes, Words),
      maplist(string_to_list, Words, Strings),
      filter(endsWithIng, Strings, MatchingStrings),
      writeMany(MatchingStrings),
      halt.
  
  codesToWords([], []).
  codesToWords([Head | Tail], Words) :-
      ( char_type(Head, space) ->
          codesToWords(Tail, Words)
      ;
          getWord([Head | Tail], Word, Rest),
          codesToWords(Rest, Words0),
          Words = [Word | Words0]
      ).
  
  getWord([], [], []).
  getWord([Head | Tail], Word, Rest) :-
      (
          ( char_type(Head, space) ; char_type(Head, punct) )
      ->  Word = [], Tail = Rest
      ;   getWord(Tail, Word0, Rest), Word = [Head | Word0]
      ).
  
  filter(Predicate, List0, List) :-
      ( List0 = [] -> List = []
      ;   List0 = [Head | Tail],
          ( apply(Predicate, [Head]) ->
              filter(Predicate, Tail, List1),
              List = [Head | List1]
          ;   filter(Predicate, Tail, List)
          )
      ).
  
  endsWithIng(String) :- sub_string(String, _Start, _Len, 0, 'ing').
  
  writeMany([]).
  writeMany([Head | Tail]) :- write(Head), nl, writeMany(Tail).

Java is an object-oriented language incorporating native support for
the Internet, that was originally designed to permit the same
executable program to be run on most computer platforms.  Java has
replaced COBOL as the standard language for business enterprise
software::

  import java.io.*;
  public class IngWords {
      public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
          BufferedReader in = new BufferedReader(new
  	    InputStreamReader(
                   System.in));
          String line = in.readLine();
          while (line != null) {
              for (String word : line.split(" ")) {
                  if (word.endsWith("ing"))
                      System.out.println(word);
              }
              line = in.readLine();
          }
      }
  }


The C programming language is a highly-efficient low-level language
that is popular for operating system and networking software::

  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <string.h>

  int main(int argc, char **argv) {
     int i = 0;
     int c = 1;
     char buffer[1024];

     while (c != EOF) {
         c = fgetc(stdin);
         if ( (c >= '0' && c <= '9') || (c >= 'a' && c <= 'z') || (c >= 'A' && c <= 'Z') ) {
             buffer[i++] = (char) c;
             continue;
         } else {
             if (i > 2 && (strncmp(buffer+i-3, "ing", 3) == 0 || strncmp(buffer+i-3, "ING", 3) == 0 ) ) {
                 buffer[i] = 0;
                 puts(buffer);
             }
             i = 0;
         }
     }
     return 0;
  }

LISP is a so-called functional programming language, in which all
objects are lists, and all operations are performed by (nested)
functions of the form ``(function arg1 arg2 ...)``.  Many of the
earliest NLP systems were implemented in LISP::

  (defpackage "REGEXP-TEST" (:use "LISP" "REGEXP"))
  (in-package "REGEXP-TEST")
  
  (defun has-suffix (string suffix)
    "Open a file and look for words ending in _ing."
    (with-open-file (f string)
       (with-loop-split (s f " ")
          (mapcar #'(lambda (x) (has_suffix suffix x)) s))))
  
  (defun has_suffix (suffix string)
    (let* ((suffix_len (length suffix))
     (string_len (length string))
      (base_len (- string_len suffix_len)))
      (if (string-equal suffix string :start1 0 :end1 NIL :start2 base_len :end2 NIL)
          (print string))))
  
  (has-suffix "test.txt" "ing")
  
Ruby is a more recently developed language than Python,
best known for its convenient web application framework, *Ruby on Rails*.
It currently lacks the extensive set of libraries that Python enjoys.
Here are two Ruby programs for finding words ending in `ing`:lx:\ ::

  ARGF.each { |line|
    line.split.find_all { |word|
      word.match(/ing$/)
    }.each { |word|
      puts word
    }
  }


  for line in ARGF
    for word in line.split
      if word.match(/ing$/) then
        puts word
      end
    end
  end

Haskell is another functional programming language which permits
a much more compact (but incomprehensible) solution of our simple task::

  import Data.List
  main = putStr . unlines . filter ("ing" `isSuffixOf`) . words =<< getContent

The unix shell can also be used for simple linguistic processing.  Here is
a simple pipeline for finding the `ing`:lx: words.  The first step transliterates
any whitespace character to a newline, so that each word of the text occurs on
its own line, and the second step finds all lines ending in `ing`:lx:\ ::

  tr [:space:] '\n' | grep ing$

(We are grateful to the following people for furnishing us with these
program samples: Tim Baldwin, Trevor Cohn, David Duke, Rod Farmer,
Andrew Hardie, Aaron Harnly, Edward Ivanovic, and Lars Yencken.)

.. include:: footer.rst
