.. -*- mode: rst -*-
.. include:: ../definitions.rst

.. overview of book

.. _chap-conclusion:

==============
13. Conclusion
==============

.. _ch13-introduction:

--------------------
NLP and Intelligence
--------------------

A long-standing challenge within computer science has been to build
intelligent machines.  The chief measure of `machine intelligence`:idx: has
been a linguistic one, namely the `Turing Test`:idx:\ : can a dialogue system,
responding to a user's typed input with its own textual output,
perform so naturally that users cannot distinguish it from a human
interlocutor using the same interface?  Today, there is substantial
ongoing research and development in such areas as machine translation
and spoken dialogue, and significant commercial systems are in
widespread use.  The following `dialogue`:idx: illustrates a typical
application:

| S: How may I help you?
| U: When is Saving Private Ryan playing?
| S: For what theater?
| U: The Paramount theater.
| S: Saving Private Ryan is not playing at the Paramount theater, but
| it's playing at the Madison theater at 3:00, 5:30, 8:00, and 10:30. 

Today's commercial dialogue systems are strictly limited to
narrowly-defined domains. We could not ask the above system to provide
driving instructions or details of nearby restaurants unless the
requisite information had already been stored and suitable question
and answer sentences had been incorporated into the language
processing system.  Observe that the above system appears to
understand the user's goals: the user asks when a movie is showing and
the system correctly determines from this that the user wants to see
the movie. This inference seems so obvious to humans that we usually
do not even notice it has been made, yet a natural language system
needs to be endowed with this capability in order to interact
naturally. Without it, when asked `Do you know when Saving Private
Ryan is playing`:lx:, a system might simply |mdash| and unhelpfully
|mdash| respond with a cold `Yes`:lx:. While it appears that this dialogue
system can perform simple inferences, `inference`:topic: such sophistication is only
found in cutting edge research prototypes.  Instead, the developers of
commercial dialogue systems use contextual assumptions and simple
business logic to ensure that the different ways in which a user might
express requests or provide information are handled in a way that
makes sense for the particular application.  Thus, whether the user
says `When is ...`:lx:, or `I want to know when ...`:lx:, or `Can you tell me
when ...`:lx:, simple rules will always yield screening times.  This is
sufficient for the system to provide a useful service.

As NLP technologies become more mature, and robust methods for
analysing unrestricted text become more widespread, the prospect of
natural language 'understanding' has re-emerged as a plausible
goal. This has been brought into focus in recent years by a public
'shared task' called Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) [Dagan2006PRT]_. The basic
scenario is simple. Let's suppose we are interested in whether we can
find evidence to support a hypothesis such as `Sandra Goudie was
defeated by Max Purnell`:lx:. We are given another short text that
appears to be relevant, for example,
`Sandra Goudie was first elected to Parliament in the 2002 elections,
narrowly winning the seat of Coromandel by defeating Labour candidate
Max Purnell and pushing incumbent Green MP Jeanette Fitzsimons into
third place`:lx:. The question now is whether the text provides
sufficient evidence for us to accept the hypothesis as true. In this
particular case, the answer is No. This is a conclusion that we can
draw quite easily as humans, but it is very hard to come up with 
automated methods for making the right classification. The RTE
Challenges provide data which allow competitors to develop their
systems, but not enough data to allow statistical classifiers to be
trained using standard machine learning techniques. Consequently, some
linguistic analysis is crucial. In the above example, it is important
for the system to note that `Sandra Goudie`:lx: names the person being
defeated in the hypothesis, not the person doing the defeating in the
text. As another illustration of the difficulty of the task, consider
the following text/hypothesis pair:

* `David Golinkin is the editor or author of eighteen books, and over 150 responsa, articles, sermons and books`:lx: 

* `Golinkin has written eighteen books`:lx:

In order to determine whether or not the hypothesis is supported by the
text, the system needs at least the following background knowledge:
(i) if someone is an author of a book, then he/she has written that
book; (ii) if someone is an editor of a book, then he/she has not
written that book; (iii) if someone is editor or author of eighteen
books, then he/she is not author of eighteen books. 

.. discuss another domain, e.g. MT?

Despite the research-led advances in tasks like RTE, natural language
systems that have been deployed for real-world applications still cannot perform
common-sense reasoning or draw on world knowledge in a general and
robust manner.  We can wait for these difficult artificial
intelligence problems to be solved, but in the meantime it is
necessary to live with some severe limitations on the reasoning and
knowledge capabilities of natural language systems. Accordingly, right
from the beginning, an important goal of |NLP| research has been to
make progress on the holy grail of natural linguistic interaction
`without`:em: recourse to this unrestricted knowledge and reasoning capability.

This has also been the goal of this book, and we hope that readers have
been equipped with the knowledge and skills to build useful |NLP| systems,
and to advance the field ever closer to its goal of providing
*intelligent* |NLP| systems.

------------------------------
NLP and the Riches of Language
------------------------------

The importance of language to science and the arts is matched in
significance by the cultural treasure embodied in language.
Each of the world's ~7,000 human languages is rich in unique respects,
in its oral histories and creation legends, down to its grammatical
constructions and its very words and their nuances of meaning.
Threatened remnant cultures have words to distinguish plant subspecies
according to therapeutic uses that are unknown to science.  Languages
evolve over time as they come into contact with each other and they
provide a unique window onto human pre-history.  Technological change
gives rise to new words like `blog`:lx: and new morphemes like `e-`:lx: and
`cyber-`:lx:.  In many parts of the world, small linguistic variations
from one town to the next add up to a completely different language in
the space of a half-hour drive.  For its breathtaking complexity and
diversity, human language is as a colorful tapestry stretching
through time and space.


