.. -*- mode: rst -*-
.. include:: ../definitions.rst

.. overview of book

.. _chap-conclusion:

==============
14. Conclusion
==============

.. _ch14-introduction:

------------
Introduction
------------

This book has presented a carefully-balanced selection of introductory |NLP|
material, including theoretical foundations and practical
applications.  You should now be equipped to work with large datasets, to create
robust models of linguistic phenomena, and to deploy them in working
language technologies.  We hope that our use of the Natural
Language Toolkit (|NLTK|) has been effective in opening up the exciting
endeavor of practical natural language processing to a broader
audience than ever before.

--------------------
NLP and Intelligence
--------------------


---------------------------
NLP and Language Technology
---------------------------

Most human knowledge |mdash| and most human communication |mdash| is
represented and expressed using language.  ...

------------------------------
NLP and the Riches of Language
------------------------------

The importance of language to science and the arts is matched in
significance by the cultural treasure embodied in language.
Each of the world's ~7,000 human languages is rich in unique respects,
in its oral histories and creation legends, down to its grammatical
constructions and its very words and their nuances of meaning.
Threatened remnant cultures have words to distinguish plant subspecies
according to therapeutic uses that are unknown to science.  Languages
evolve over time as they come into contact with each other and they
provide a unique window onto human pre-history.  Technological change
gives rise to new words like `blog`:lx: and new morphemes like `e-`:lx: and
`cyber-`:lx:.  In many parts of the world, small linguistic variations
from one town to the next add up to a completely different language in
the space of a half-hour drive.  For its breathtaking complexity and
diversity, human language is as a colorful tapestry stretching
through time and space.


